---
layout: post

title: About the Website
title-url:
subtitle:
subtitle-url:
quote:
excerpt:
source:
source-url:
call-to-action:

date: 1993-01-01 09:53:37
update:
author:
    avatar: https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a76b4d6291cecb3a738896a971bfb903?s=512&d=mp&r=g
    name: Ted Tschopp
    url: https://tedt.org/

bullets:

description:
seo-description:

categories:
tags:
keywords:



location:
    name:
coordinates:
    latitude:
    longitude:

image:
image-alt:
image-artist:
image-artist-URL:
image-credits:
image-credits-URL:
image-credits-artist:
image-credits-artist-URL:
image-credits-title:
image-description:
image-title:

monster-or-magical-or-religious-ideas:
year-the-event-took-place:
permalink: /About/

mathjax:

order:
---

**Welcome to My World: Technology, Creativity, and Philosophy**

Hi there! I'm Ted Tschopp, and this is my personal blog where I explore the intriguing intersection of technology, theology, and creativity. As a Senior Enterprise Architect at Southern California Edison, I've spent over a decade navigating the complexities of the digital and automation landscapes, shaping strategies for one of the largest investor-owned utilities in the U.S.

But there's more to me than just tech. I'm deeply passionate about theology, religion, folklore, and storytelling - interests that often intertwine with my professional life. This blog is a window into my world, where I share insights, musings, and experiences across a spectrum of topics.

**Journey with Me Through Varied Interests**

1. **Technology and Digital Innovation:** From my extensive experience in corporate IT strategy to my involvement in significant projects like the Edison SmartConnect and corporate portal redesigns, I delve into the nuances of digital transformation and the exciting world of emerging technologies.

2. **Role-Playing Games and Storytelling:** As an avid tabletop RPG enthusiast, I often pen down my thoughts on game mechanics, character creation, and the art of storytelling within these fantastical realms.

3. **Folklore and Theology:** My interest in folklore has led me to translate and share intriguing Swiss folklore stories. Meanwhile, my reflections on theology offer a contemplative look at religion in the modern world.

4. **Art and Creativity:** I believe in the power of creativity, whether it's through developing procedural text generation tools or discussing the relationship between technology and art.

**A Bit More About Me**

Before joining Southern California Edison, I ventured into entrepreneurship, founding a community website dedicated to the works of J.R.R. Tolkien. This journey, along with my earlier experience in market research, has significantly shaped my perspective on technology and its role in society.

Outside of work, I'm dedicated to being a great dad and husband, always striving to balance my professional ambitions with my personal life.

**Join the Conversation**

I invite you to explore my blog, engage with my posts, and join me in this journey of continuous learning and discovery. Whether it's a deep dive into the latest tech trends, a philosophical discussion, or a shared love for RPGs, there's something here for everyone passionate about technology and its myriad intersections with our lives.

Welcome aboard, and let's enjoy this ride together!

